# Technical Notes

This file contains technical notes that may be useful to anyone exploring the internals of Lightroom 6.14 Classic.

### Wishlist
- Log or display of Javascript errors, especially those triggered when JS is invoked from LUA
- Find better decompiler for LUA 5.1, source code generated by unluac is hard to follow
- Run arbitrary LUA code via [`config.lua`](#debug-log) or [other LUA files](#lua-files)
- Enable the [LUA debugger](#lua-debugger)

### Tools
- [Resource Hacker](https://angusj.com/resourcehacker/) (Windows only) to extract the LUA files
- [unluac](https://sourceforge.net/projects/unluac/) to decompile the LUA binaries to somewhat human-readable source code.
- [patchluastr](patchluastr.py) to replace strings in LUA binaries
- [Ghidra](https://ghidra-sre.org/) to decompile and analyze native code
- [Frida](https://frida.re) to intercept and modify DLL calls

### Table of contents
- [LUA](#lua)
- [Location module](#location-module)
- [Debug log](#debug-log)
- [Chromium Embedded Framework](#chromium-embedded-framework)
- [Phoning home](#phoning-home)
- [Misc notes](#misc-notes)

## LUA

Large parts of Lightroom, including all the modules (Library, Develop, Location, etc.), are written in LUA 5.1. Except for `AgKernel`, the LUA code is only available as byte code. 

Lightroom contains ~2400 LUA files (libraries?), organized into 50 "modules", which (on Windows) are stored as resources in `.dll`, `.exe` and `.lrmodule` files. When stored in a `.dll` or `.exe`, that file may also contain native code associated with the functionality of the LUA code.

Each LUA module contains the file `INFO.LUA`, which specifies the name and version of the module, and makes specific libraries within that module available globally.

### LUA files

During startup, Lightroom also tries to open the following LUA files:
```
[program path]config.lua
[program path]config.lua.txt
[appdata roaming path]config.lua
[appdata roaming path]config.lua.txt
[appdata roaming path]config-kernel.lua
[program path]AgNamespace.lua
[program path]/lua/AgNamespace.lua
[program path]/lua/AgNamespace.lua/init.lua
[program path]AgNamespace.lua/init.lua
```

`config.lua` can be used to enable a [debug log](#debug-log). It may be possible to leverage these files to run arbitrary LUA code. 

## Location module

The LUA libraries for Lightroom's Location module are stored in the file `Location.lrmodule`.

The Location module uses [Google Maps Javascript API](https://developers.google.com/maps/documentation/javascript). Specifically, Lightroom Classic 6.14 was developed using Google Maps JS API version v3.12.

The Location module first broke with API version v3.52, likely due to Javascript exceptions caused by [deprecated attributes](https://github.com/astuder/lightroom-map-fix/issues/41#issuecomment-1481832871). This was fixed by requesting API version v3.51, however this stopped working in November 2023 when Google removed access to that API version.

The LUA code generating HTML for the map view is found in `LOCATONMAPVIEW.LUA`. In addition, the resources of `Location.lrmodule` include images and a few `.JS` files that are referenced in the Javascript code generated by `LOCATIONMAPVIEW.LUA`. 

The HTML code generated for the map view can be exfiltrated by patching `LOCATIONMAPVIEW.LUA`:
```diff
< <html>
> <html><textarea><![CDATA[
< </html>
> ]]></textarea></html>
```
With this patch, the HTML code is displayed in a text box and can be selected with the mouse and copied into a new file.

Javascript running in the map calls back to LUA through `hosteval()`, see `callCallback = function()` in the generated HTML page. Javascript code is also directly invoked from LUA across several libraries.

When the Location module stops working, the most likely reason are uncaught exceptions in Javascript invoked from LUA.

## Debug log

Lightroom has low-level logging, which is turned off by default.

To enable logging:
1. In Lightroom, go to `Help > System Info` and find `Settings Folder`
2. In that folder, create a new file named `config.lua` with the following text content:
```lua
loggers["Location"] = {
  logLevel = 'trace',
  action = 'logfile',
}
```
3. Restart Lightroom and you will see log files in your user's `Documents` folder (Windows, might be somewhere else on Mac)
4. To disable logging, delete or rename `config.lua` and restart Lightroom.

Log level `trace` can be replaced with `debug` for different output.

The logging functionality is described in following comment found in `AgKernel.dll/LUA/KRCONFIGURATION.LUA`:
```
--[[
--- KrConfiguration provides a shared mechanism for retrieving application-wide configuration
--  details. Configurations are represented as a tree of configuration properties.

--  When KrConfiguration is first loaded, it searches both the Lightroom application directory
--  and the Lightroom support files directory for a config.lua file. It merges the results of
--  these files if found and exports them as the KrConfiguration namespace.

--  Example Configuration File:

--  loggers.AgImageMetadata = {
--    logLevel = "trace",
--    action = "print"
--  }

--  This will result in an entry in KrConfiguration called 'logger', that contains the tree
--  described in the configuration file.
--]]
```

## Chromium Embedded Framework

Under the hood, the map view uses the [Chromium Embedded Framework](https://github.com/chromiumembedded/cef) (CEF). Native code and related LUA libraries are stored in the file `cef_toolkit.dll`. `devtools_resources.pak` is also part of CEF.

Getting CEF to log any Javascript errors would be very helpful for fixing the Location module.

The following LUA module and libraries are stored in `cef_toolkit.dll`:
```
AgToolkitIdentifier = "com.adobe.ag.cef_toolkit"

AgExports:
  AgCefHost = "AgCefHost.lua"
  AgHtml5View = "AgHtml5View.lua"
  AgCEFView = "AgCEFView.lua"
  AgViewWinHtml5View = "C:registerAgViewWinHtml5View_L"
```

Unfortunately, no log output is generated for any of these names.

Based on the decompiled native code, `cef_toolkit.dll` also implements the LUA-to-Javascript interface:
```cpp
AgViewWinHtml5View::RunJavaScript()
AgViewWinHtml5View::RunJsCallback()
```

`libcef.dll` contains the low-level CEF C API. Usage example of the low-level API:
https://github.com/cztomczak/cefcapi/blob/master/examples/main_win.c

Hash `770131916655f914b4659d82ef08993bf9cfdc22` referenced in code in `cef_toolkit.dll` points to API version `3.2704.1431`, available [here](https://github.com/sstream536/cef3-duilib-YDDemo/blob/master/Cef/include/cef_version.h).

CEF has [remote debugging](https://github.com/cztomczak/cefpython/blob/master/docs/Knowledge-Base.md#remote-debugging-with-google-chrome-instance) functionality. Can be enabled by setting `debug_port` in `cef_settings_t` structure passed to `cef_initialize` function. Refer to API version linked above as structure changed over time. 

Plan: Use [Frida](https://frida.re) inspect and modify settings structure.

Result: 

## Phoning home

Lightroom sends HTTP requests to ```www.photoshop.com```, presumably to verify whether certain features are available for a given version of Lightroom.

For the Location module, the request is:
```
https://www.photoshop.com/api/service_status/lightroom/6.14:v1.0.0.0/win/en_us/google-map.json
```

The response is:
```json
{
  "locale": "en_us",
  "status": "ok",
  "timestamp": "2023-11-22T08:24:20+00:00"
}
```

Replacing `google-map` with an arbitrary string returns the same result, indicating that this the service status functionality is no longer active. Though still worth documenting in case of issues when the URL goes offline, or Adobe changes its mind.

The LUA code responsible is in `AGSERVICESTATUS.LUA`, found in `LightroomSDK.dll`.

Related: Service status was used to disable maps in Lightroom 5 (see [issue #8](https://github.com/astuder/lightroom-map-fix/issues/8)):
```
https://www.photoshop.com/api/service_status/lightroom/5.0:v1.0.0.0/win/en_us/google-map.json
```
```json
{
  "locale": "en_us",
  "status": "kill",
  "message_title": "Map is not available",
  "message_body": "Map view is no longer supported on this version of Lightroom.  For more information go to www.adobe.com/go/lightroom-map",
  "timestamp": "2018-07-16T06:33:49Z"
}
```

## Misc notes

Miscellaneous observations.

### Lightroom Command line

`Lightroom.exe` may have these command line options:
* `-runLua`
* `-logToDebugStr`

### LUA debugger

Native code found in `wichitafoundation.dll` and `AgKernel.dll` indicate remote LUA debugging functionality, possibly accessible on port 11111.

```cpp
if (bIsDistribution == 0) {
  if (_DAT_18016e24c != 0) {
    KrDebugger_setCodeRunner(0,FUN_180032c80);
  }
  if (DAT_18016e250 == 0) {
    AgDebugger_setBreakOnThrow(0);
    pcVar2 = "11111";
    if (PTR_s_11111_18016e278 != (undefined *)0x0) {
      pcVar2 = PTR_s_11111_18016e278;
    }
    PTR_s_11111_18016e278 = pcVar2;
    DAT_18017d880 = KrDebugger_open();
  }
  if (DAT_18017d880 != 0) {
    AgLua_setCodeCapturing(DAT_18017d880,1);
  }
}
```

### Random

- `natives_blob.bin` contains JavaScript
- `snapshot_blob.bin` contains some kind of bytecode, probably not Lua
